RUNNING THE PROJECTS
go to the project folder
run=> npm install
start=> npm start

** 2024-11-18 MONDAY **

Today I revised git commands and practically implemented how to use commands such as init, check git status, commit the code, add the files to the remote respository, clone the folder from the remote repository. I also learned about git branching and merging, also how to delete the branch from the repository and switch between the branches.

After completing the git revision, I started the Udemy course on React Js. In today's lecture, I watched the roadmap of the course and the projects that I am going to build during the course. After that I learned about the use of react and why frontend frameworks exists nowdays and why we don't use vanilla javascript anymore.

I set up the visual studio code environment installing several extensions such as eslint, preetier, Quokka, for my easiness during the development period. Also I had a quick tour of the react official documentation and explored where to get the details on specific topic. The course had a module for javascript recap so I at first decided to complete it and for today I was able to revise few concepts such as rest and spread operator and when to use it. Template literals, object and array destructuring, ternary operators and arrow function.

-> Used the extension called Quokka to test the javascript code as we write. To set it up just enter ctrl+shift+p and select Quokka.js for current file.

=> 2024/11/19

Completed the remaining course on javascript recap which included short circuiting and logical operators: how to use them.
Also learned how optional chaining (?) can be used to check whether the property exists or not and if not how we can pass the fallback value using the ?? (nullish coalescing operator). After that I revised different array methods such as map, filter, sort, reduce, where and how to use them and in what type of circumstances. Later, I worked on how to manipulate the arrays and objects without changing the original one. Had some practice on how to perform insert, delete and update on array and objects. On the end of this section, I learned on how to use the async function to fetch the data from api.

After completing the javascript revision I walked through the react section where I learn about the jsx, components,and props. In the starting I created a react app through the Create React App for a pizza menu application. While doing this project I learned on how to make components on react and how to assemble multiple components to create a beautiful user interface. During this time, I also learned on how to pass data from the parent component to the child by the help of props. Anything can be passed through the props and in React data flows from top to bottom i.e. from parent to child.While in the middle of this section, there was a challenge part to create a profile card on sandbox and I created it based on my own design.
At the end of the section, I learned on how to map through a list and render the objects to the components.Also I learned how to use the conditional rendering to render the component based on a certain condition. With the help of conditional rendering, we can use multiple returns on a single component.On the final part I got to know how to destructure the props and use it to make our code clean. I got to know that by using react fragments it helps to main the ui of the code. And at the end I learned how to conditionally set the classname and texts.

=> 2024/11/20
Completed the section 6 of the udemy course where I learned about state, event handlers and forms. In this section I learned on how and where to use the state. The state is like a memory of the component. It is used by importing the useState hook from react. It uses two values the state value and the setter function to set the values. Based on the state the component renders if there's any change in the state. The state can't be modified directly as react has some rules on how and where the state can be modified. After that I installed the react developer tools from the chrome extension and learned on how to check the component tree using the developer tool and modify state values from there. Using the concept of react state, I did a small project which shows on which date and day will it be based on the count. Similarly, I was introduced to building forms in this section. I learned on how to use the controlled components such as input, select, etc. I worked on how to keep track of value using the onChange property and also how to set the value and update using the state variable. Based on it, I created a travel project which is like a todo but it involved the concept of controlled components, event handlers, and useState hooks.

=> 2024/11/21
Completed the section 7 of the course. In this section I learned on how to think in react and how to manage the state simply by lifting it up. In react, we should think on how to divide the user interface on multiple components, how to use the state and where to use it. Here I learned the fundamentals of the state management. In small projects, state management can be done simply by lifting the state up. We can only pass the data as props to the child component from parent. We can't pass the data to the siblings or from child to parent. So one way to solve it is simply by lifting the state up to the nearest parent component and passing the data to the child components as a prop.In this section, I worked on a previous incomplete project called travel list. Here using the concept of state management, I performed CRUD operation (adding items to the list, updating the list by checking it as done/undone, deleting the single item based on id). Similary I perfomed sorting the list based on different values such as added sequence, based on description (alphabetical order) and based on its packed status. For it, javascript sort method was used. Similary, I learned on derived state, how a value can be derived from one state simply instead of creating a brand new state for it. At the end of the section, I learned on how a component can be moved in a separate file and used efficiently with the clean code practice. Also, I learned on how to use the children props and make changes efficiently in any component. In this section, I completed a few projects on code sandbox too. As a first project, I created an accordion where I utilized the concept of state management. Similarly as a second project, I modified the accordion such that only one accordion item is opened at once.

=> 2024/11/22
Completed the last section (section 8) of part I (react fundamentals). In this section, We utilized the concepts of react fundamentals and built an app called eat-n-split. It is basically a react app where two friends can split a bill and based on who paid the bill their status are updated on how much one owe to another. In this app at first with the help of static list, we built the layout for the friend list and then added a part where we can add a new friend. Using the concept of state we handled on how the friend list gets updated on adding friends. while creaing the add friend section we utilized the concept of form and props and while passing the data to sibling component we utilized the concept of lifing the state. After that we created a form to split the bill between the users. Here we utilized the concept of form ,inputs, and select. In this project it was really tricky to pass the data the between several components. The code grew larger and was difficult to manage but we did it. We utilized the concept of event handling and props drilling a lot in this section. We also utilized the concept of conditional rendering to display the form to split bill, while displaying add friend form , and also while selecting the friend to split the bill. This section was fun and full of challenges.

=> 2024/11/25
Started the new part (Part2) of the react course. In this section I started the intermediate React. Here, I started a movie app named usePopcorn. It has the list of movies and users can add the movies to their watch list, and also it will have the feature of search functionality in the upcoming sections. Today, I started this project and learned on how to split a UI into a component. Basically, how to split a larger component in multiple smaller and reusable ones. I learned how the components are categorized in react.
i. Stateless/ Presentational Component: -> doesn't have state. They can receive props and present the received data. They are usually small and reusable.
ii. Stateful Components: -> They have their own states and can be reusable.
iii. Structual Components: -> They are the page layouts or screen of the app. They are the result of component composition. They can be huge and non reusable (not necessarily).

In this section, I learned deeper about prop drilling. It is the concept where data is passed through props deeply in a component with the help of nested parent components. Since it makes the code messy and also a bit tough to understand as the code grows, We can use component composition as its solution. Component composition is combining different components using the children props (or explicitly by defined props which is not much used). Children props is widely preferred during the component composition. Through this, we can create highly reusable and flexible components. After that I modified the initial code with the help of component composition and made it look clean and reusable.
On the later parts of this section, we worked on creating the star compnent which will be used later for rating. Here we used the array method to create the stars based on given numbers, which we passed as prop.In this part we learned on handling the hover events and display temporary ratings while hovering. We worked on various factors, and utilized the concept of props to make the star component very much reusable in every aspect. Also we worked on propTypes which allows us a developer to prevent users from entering other data types. PropTypes helps us in type checking.
After completing the section, I started working on a small quizz app, that I am building utilizing the concepts that i learned in the course.
